---
layout: project
title: Spinal nerve MRI analysis
thumbnail: /assets/img/projects_thumbnail_ces.png
status: active
---

{% include project_head.html 
disease_area = "Neuroscience; neurosurgery; cauda equina syndrome"
data_sources = "University Hospitals Plymouth"
project_stage = "Data collection"
ethical_approval = "Granted"
principal_investigator = "Dr Mark Thurston"
lead_researcher = "Dr Mark Thurston"
%}

### Summary

Cauda equina syndrome occurs when the nerves at the base of the spine are
suddenly compressed which may result in bladder dysfunction, bowel
dysfunction, and/or sensory changes in the saddle area. The condition can
require emergency surgery: delayed treatment can result in long-term
irreversible life-changing nerve damage.

![MRI of the spinal
canal](/assets/img/projects_thumbnail_ces.png){:width="400px"}

Patients can present to their GP with non-specific symptoms but have
significant and unexpected critical findings on their MRI identified at the
point of reporting. Unfortunately, there is an ongoing significant backlog of
radiology reporting, meaning that many patients referred from the community for
MRI will not have their scan reviewed by a radiologist immediately.

A computer vision model that can correctly categorise MRI images would enable
prioritised reporting of MRI scans with potential nerve compression. We are
undertaking this project to investigate the feasibility of this approach.


### Opt-out

The <a href="https://digital.nhs.uk/services/national-data-opt-out">national
data opt-out</a> enables patients to opt out from the use of their data for
research or planning purposes. In addition, we provide a local opt-out facility
on a project-by-project basis. More information is available on our
<a href="{% link pages/optout.md %}">opt-out page</a>.
