---
layout: project
title: Using Artificial Intelligence to predict future stroke
thumbnail: /assets/img/projects_thumbnail_stroke.png
status: active
---

{% include project_head.html 
disease_area = "Neuroscience; stroke"
data_sources = '<a href="https://www.plymouthhospitals.nhs.uk/">University Hospitals Plymouth NHS Trust (UHPNT)</a>'
project_stage = "consultation"
ethical_approval = "granted"
principal_investigator = "Stephen Mullin"
lead_researcher_imaging = "Megan Courtman"
lead_researcher_cardiology = "Aishwarya Kasabe"
lead_researcher_laboratory_investigations = "Will Heseltine-Carp"
funders = '<a href="https://www.ukri.org/councils/mrc/">UKRI (Medical Research Council)</a>' 
paper_reference = ""
%}

### Summary
Stroke is the most common neurological disease and the most common cause of disability in the UK and worldwide. A number of treatments (such as lowering blood pressure or taking blood thinners) have been shown to reduce the risk of stroke, however some of the factors that lead to stroke are not yet clear. Many people who later developed strokes have unidentified or untreated risk factors for it, which werew not addresses because of a lack of capacity and systems within the NHS to do so. We hope that by applying state of art artificial intelligence techniques 

Using past ECGs, brain scans, heart scans, laboratory test results and medical records, we aim to automatically generate estimates of the risk of stroke in the near future. We will achieve this by taking data drawn from the systems of [University Hospitals Plymouth NHS Trust](https://www.plymouthhospitals.nhs.uk/) of people who have had and have not had strokes in the past. We hope to use the data of up to 120,000 people for this study. Before sending the data to our research team for analysis, NHS data managers whp site within the routine clinical care team (i.e would normally have access to the data as part of delivering clinical care to the people affected) will remove any data which allows people to be identified from it.  

We will then use a technique called machine learning to look for patterns which are more common in one or more investigation of those who later develop a stroke. This will we hope enable the construction of software which can give a sophisticated estimate of the future risk of stroke at 1,3, 5 and 10 years. Using techniques known as explainable AI, we also hope to be able to identify new markers of future stroke, which will may enable treatments to prevent it.    

Whilst it is not practical to ask explicit consent to use this data, however we will not use the data of those who have signed up to the NHS England opt out register. Prior to us finalising the database used for analysis, you can also opt out of data use for this and other research studies undertaken by SUSTAIN SW by following the link at bottom of the page.  


